LRE ZNE comparison tutorial (#2551)
unitaryfund/mitiq: docs/source/examples/lre-zne-comparison.md

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.16.1
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Comparing LRE and ZNE

Both LRE and ZNE work in two main stages: generate noise-scaled circuits via scaling, and apply inference to resulting measurements post-execution.

This workflow can be executed by a single call to `execute_with_lre` or `execute_with_zne`.
For resource estimation, Mitiq provides `multivariate_layer_scaling` to inspect the circuits that are to be executed.
For ZNE we have access to the scaled circuits using the function `scaled_circuits`.

```{danger}
LRE is currently compatible with quantum programs written using `cirq`.
Work on making this technique compatible with other frontends is ongoing. 🚧

> ```

Author: great, removed!

```{danger}
LRE is currently compatible with quantum programs written using `cirq`.
Work on making this technique compatible with other frontends is ongoing. 🚧
```

## Problem Setup

For this demonstration, we'll first define a quantum circuit, and a method of executing circuits for demonstration purposes.

Here we will use the rotated randomized benchmarking circuits on a single qubit and generate 50 random such circuits.

```{code-cell} ipython3
from mitiq.benchmarks import generate_rotated_rb_circuits

circuits = generate_rotated_rb_circuits(n_qubits=1,
                                        num_cliffords=3,
                                        theta=0.7,
                                        trials=50,
                                        seed=4)

print(circuits[0])
```

> We define an [executor](executors.md) which simulates the input circuit subjected to depolarizing noise, and returns the probability of measuring the ground state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We define an [executor](../guide/executors.md) which simulates the input circuit subjected to depolarizing noise, and returns the probability of measuring the ground state.
```
IDK if this might help.

Author: Thanks Purva! I will try this out.

def execute(circuit, noise_level=0.025):
    noisy_circuit = circuit.with_noise(depolarize(p=noise_level))
    rho = DensityMatrixSimulator().simulate(noisy_circuit).final_density_matrix
    return rho[0, 0].real
```

> ```{code-cell} ipython3

Author: sounds good

import numpy as np

> # Collect ideal and noisy values (probability of measuring 0 across all 100 circuits).

Author: you are right, lets remove the specific numbers

noisy_values = np.zeros(len(circuits))
ideal_values = np.zeros(len(circuits))

for i, circuit in enumerate(circuits):
    noisy = execute(circuit)
    noisy_values[i] = noisy
    ideal = execute(circuit, noise_level=0.0)

>     ideal_values[i] = ideal

Author: correct, I guess it is a habit of mine to always use numpy arrays :). Do you just use sum(list)/len(list) to implement the mean for lists? I want to use mean(list) because that just looks nicer :). I can define a mean function or import from statistics (or some other library).

>     ideal_values[i] = ideal

Reviewer 2: You can still use `np.mean` on the noisy/ideal values, or as you suggested `sum/len` works too!

```

```{code-cell} ipython3
# The theoretical value for the probability of measuring 0 when taking an average over all the rotated rb circuits.
p = lambda theta: 1 - (2/3) * np.sin(theta/2)**2

print(f'Average error for noisy values: {np.abs(np.mean(noisy_values) - p(0.7))}')
print(f'Average error for ideal values: {np.abs(np.mean(ideal_values) - p(0.7))}')
```

> For the ideal values we still see a small error, since the circuits are randomly generated and the theoretical value is achieved in the limit where we generate all the possible circuits.

Author: the ideal value (the function p that I defined) is the probability of measuring 0 when taking an average over all the rotated rb circuits. In this case we are only generating 50 such random circuits, so there will be noise due to randomness. I can try to rephrase it a bit better!

With the circuit and executor defined, we just need to choose the polynomial extrapolation degree as well as the fold multiplier. For ZNE we use the default values for the scale factors.

```{code-cell} ipython3
from mitiq.lre import execute_with_lre
from mitiq.zne import execute_with_zne

degree = 2
fold_multiplier = 3

# Collect mitigated values (probability of measuring 0 across all 100 circuits) using LRE and ZNE.
mitigated_values_lre = np.zeros(len(circuits))
mitigated_values_zne = np.zeros(len(circuits))

for i, circuit in enumerate(circuits):
    mitigated_lre = execute_with_lre(circuit,
                                     execute,
                                     degree=degree,
                                     fold_multiplier=fold_multiplier)
    mitigated_values_lre[i] = mitigated_lre
    mitigated_zne = execute_with_zne(circuit, execute)
    mitigated_values_zne[i] = mitigated_zne
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
error_lre = np.abs(np.mean(mitigated_values_lre) - p(0.7))
error_zne = np.abs(np.mean(mitigated_values_zne) - p(0.7))

print(f'Average error of mitigated values using LRE: {error_lre}')
print(f'Average error of mitigated values using ZNE: {error_zne}')
```

> ## Resource estimation

Author: We can discuss this in more detail, but I think it is nice to use these new functions to access the circuits that are to be executed.

> ## Resource estimation

Reviewer 2: Met with Farrokh to discuss today and we agreed the tutorial as written is good. The resource estimation workflow is good to demo on its own, even if the circuits have to be regenerated. It demonstrates a more realistic workflow, rather than running, and then looking at overhead.

print(
    f"Average circuit depth = {avg_depth_scaled_circuits_lre}"
)
```

Next for ZNE.

```{code-cell} ipython3
from mitiq.zne.scaling import fold_gates_at_random
from mitiq.zne.zne import scaled_circuits

scale_factors = [1.0, 2.0, 3.0]

avg_num_scaled_circuits_zne = 0.0
avg_depth_scaled_circuits_zne = 0.0

for circuit in circuits:
    noise_scaled_circuits_zne = scaled_circuits(circuit=circuit, scale_factors=[1.0, 2.0, 3.0], scale_method=fold_gates_at_random)
    num_scaled_circuits_zne = len(noise_scaled_circuits_zne)

    avg_num_scaled_circuits_zne += num_scaled_circuits_zne/len(circuits)
    avg_depth_scaled_circuits_zne += (1/len(circuits))*sum(len(circuit) for circuit in noise_scaled_circuits_zne) / num_scaled_circuits_zne

print(f"Average number of noise-scaled circuits for ZNE = {avg_num_scaled_circuits_zne}")
print(
    f"Average circuit depth = {avg_depth_scaled_circuits_zne}"
)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
print(f'Error improvement LRE over ZNE: {error_zne/error_lre}')
print(f'Ratio number of circuits required for LRE vs ZNE: {avg_num_scaled_circuits_lre/avg_num_scaled_circuits_zne}')
```

## Conclusion

> At the cost of many extra circuits to execute, in this specific case a factor of 50/3 ~= 17, LRE obtains a an improvement of ~3x in error rate.
> The number of circuits we tested the two approaches is very limited, so there is not much confidence in these numbers.
> Much more research needs to be conducted to get a better sense of the trade-off between performance and resources required.

Reviewer 2: This is a great conclusion, except it's a little bit pessimistic in tone. I think we can make it more optimistic without being untruthful. WDYT of the following suggestion?

```suggestion
With an additional cost of many circuits---in this case, around 17 times more---LRE achieves a notable improvement, reducing the error rate by approximately threefold.
Although our current tests were limited in the number of circuits, which means these results carry some uncertainty, the potential of LRE is clear.
There’s exciting promise and further research will help us better understand the balance between performance gains and resource requirements.
```

Author: I like the more optimistic text. I will use this instead in the conclusion.
